[SPARK-54831][SQL] Support COMMENT ON COLUMN for table columns (#57311)
apache/spark: docs/sql-ref-syntax-ddl-comment.md

---
layout: global
title: COMMENT ON
displayTitle: COMMENT ON
license: |
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
---

### Description

The `COMMENT ON` statement sets or updates the comment on a database, a table, or

> one or more table columns. Setting the comment to `NULL` removes it.

Reviewer: This removal claim holds only for columns. `COMMENT ON TABLE t IS NULL` and `COMMENT ON DATABASE d IS NULL` go through `visitComment`, which maps a missing string literal to `""` — an empty comment, not removal. Scope the sentence to the column form:
```suggestion
one or more table columns. Setting a column comment to `NULL` removes it.
```

Author: Done. Scoped the removal statement to columns, and also narrowed the `comment` parameter description: for a column, `NULL` removes the comment and `''` sets an empty one; for a database or table, both `NULL` and `''` set an empty comment.

### Syntax

```sql
COMMENT ON { DATABASE | SCHEMA | NAMESPACE } database_name IS comment

COMMENT ON TABLE table_name IS comment

COMMENT ON COLUMN table_name.column_name IS comment

> COMMENT ON TABLE table_name COLUMN ( column_name IS comment [ , ... ] )

Reviewer: This form (and the nested-field `col.field` variant) doesn't actually work on the default session catalog. `ResolveSessionCatalog` converts `AlterColumns` on a V1 table into `AlterTableChangeColumnCommand`, and that path rejects both cases (`ResolveSessionCatalog.scala:86-94`):

- `COMMENT ON TABLE t COLUMN (a IS 'x', b IS 'y')` → `UNSUPPORTED_FEATURE.TABLE_OPERATION`, `operation = "ALTER COLUMN in bulk"`
- `COMMENT ON TABLE t COLUMN (point.x IS 'x')` → `operation = "ALTER COLUMN with qualified column"`

Since `spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog` defaults to `builtin`, this is what a user hits on an ordinary managed table — yet this page presents both forms with no caveat, and the example below even uses a session-style `some_db.some_table` with multiple columns and `address.city`. Two things to fix:

1. The error names "ALTER COLUMN" for a command the user wrote as `COMMENT ON` — confusing. Raise a `COMMENT ON`-specific message (or extend the V1 path to loop over comment-only specs / qualified names, if that's in scope).
2. Either make it work on V1, or document the V2-only limitation here.

The multi-column/nested tests all run against `testcat.*` (V2) only, so there's no V1 coverage catching this — a session-catalog test asserting the chosen behavior should go with the fix. (This predates the last review round; it's my own late catch, not something you introduced.)

Author: Thanks for reviewing. I went with option 1, making both forms work in the session catalog rather than documenting a V2-only limitation.

Comment-only changes that span multiple columns or target a nested field are now routed to a dedicated V1 command (`AlterTableChangeColumnCommentsCommand`) that applies all specs at once via `CatalogV2Util.applySchemaChanges`, so `COMMENT ON TABLE t COLUMN (a IS 'x', b IS 'y')` and `... (point.x IS 'x')` work on ordinary managed tables. The single-column path and the existing errors for genuinely unsupported non-comment bulk/nested ALTER COLUMN changes are unchanged.

The `NOT_SUPPORTED_CHANGE_SAME_COLUMN` check is now extracted into `AlterColumns.findRepeatedColumn`, shared between CheckAnalysis and the new V1 path (the rewrite happens during resolution, before CheckAnalysis runs), so a parent+child in the same statement is still rejected with the same message and query context. Partition columns are rejected too.

Added session-catalog (V1) coverage: multi-column, nested/deeply-nested fields, `IS NULL` removal, DESCRIBE freshness, char/varchar columns, unresolved column, parent-and-child rejection, and partition-column rejection. No doc caveat needed now since both forms work on V1 and V2.
